J
1' :‘K
mmmcm
MAW
@lbourne Law
School
Melbourne Legal Studies
Research Paper Series
N o. 905
Introduction to the Oxford Handbook on
Freedom of Speech
Adrienne Stone and Frederick Schauer
This chapter is forthcoming in:
Adrienne Stone and Frederick Schauer (eds), Oxford Handbook on Freedom of
Speech (Oxford University Press, 2020)
Electronic copy available at: httpszl/ssrn.com/abstract=3719661 /Introduction to the Oxford Handbook on Freedom of Speech
Adrienne Stone and Frederick Schauer
University of Melbourne Law School and University of Virginia School of Law
Freedom of speech is a central commitment of political liberalism, a principle of positive
constitutional law in virtually all modern constitutions and a principle of international human
rights |aw..1. Although among the most widely agreed upon and celebrated legal and
constitutional principles of modern times, it is also the source of enduring and intense
disagreement. We cannot fail to notice, moreover, that this Handbook is to be published at a
time of some controversy about the power of freedom of speech in the face of new threats
to democracy}. and the challenges of the digital economy..3. At worst, freedom of speech
might even be part of the problem — a principle weaponised against the ideals from which it
sprang..4
In this tumultuous context, this Handbook provides a comprehensive exploration of freedom
of speech both as a political idea and as a legal principle. It is arranged in three parts: The
chapters in Part I focus on freedom of speech as a political idea and upon the ideas and
rationales that underlie it; the chapters in Part II focus on distinctive features of freedom of
speech as a legal principle. In the final part ofthe Handbook, the chapters focus on a range
of controversies that have arisen in constitutional systems throughout the world and which
illustrate and elaborate upon the general themes of Parts | and II.
A. Fundamental Questions and Perspectives
Part | begins with the most fundamental questions about the nature of freedom of speech:
its history and rationales. Although a form of freedom of speech was evident in ancient
1 Freedom of speech is used here interchangeably with ’freedom of expression’ though on the relationship
between these concepts, see Frederick Schauer ’What is Speech? The Question of Coverage’ chapter [9] in this
volume.
2Mark Graber, Sanford Levinson and Mark Tushnet, (eds), Constitutional Democracy in Crisis? (Oxford
University Press, 2018).
3 Tim Wu, ’ls the First Amendment Obsolete?’ (2018) 117 Michigan Law Review 547, 568.
4Janus vAFSCME, Council31, 138 S Ct 2448, 3501 (2018). See also, Cynthia Estlund ’Freedom of Expression in
the Work Place’ chapter [xref] of this volume.
Electronic copy available at: httpszl/ssrn.com/abstract=3719661times,.5. it is enlightenment thinking that is usually credited with the decisive influence on
modern conceptions.,.5. Its influence is especially well documented by scholars of the First
Amendment to the Constitution ofthe United States. In chapter 2, Vincent Blasi, in a subtle
exploration of the classic arguments for freedom of speech, traces the first comprehensive
argument for freedom of speech as a limiting principle of government to John Milton’s
Areopagitica, a polemic against censorship by a requirement of prior licensing in which Milton
develops an argument for the pursuit of truth through exposure to false and heretical ideas
rather than the passive reception of orthodoxy.,.7.
Despite Milton’s belief in the advancement of understanding through free inquiry, he was far
from liberal in the modern sense of that term and he did not, for instance, extend the
tolerance he advocated to Catholic religious texts. The most famous and influential
exposition of a liberal theory of freedom of speech is found in the work ofJohn Stuart Mill..8.
Mill’s argumentforfreedom ofspeech, commonly understood as based on freedom ofspeech
as a facilitator of the search for truth and knowledge,.9. is central to chapters 1 and 3. In
chapter 1, Christopher McLeod reminds us of the precise nature of Mill’s claim. Three
especially important points come to the fore. First, Mill’s argument turns on the fallibility of
human knowledge and his belief in the consequent value in subjecting ideas to contradiction.
Second, while in constitutional law the focus has been on interference with freedom of
speech by the state, Mill was as much concerned with ’moral reproach’ that arises from social
intolerance and social pressure. Finally, by virtue of its focus on the pursuit of truth, the
Millian argument is focussed on discussion rather than expression more broadly and
therefore has little obvious application to non-propositional expression found in instrumental
music and abstract art. (A theme later taken up by others,.1°. including Mark Tushnet who, in
5 D M Carter, ’Citizen Attribute, Negative Right: A Conceptual Difference between Ancient and Modern Ideas of
Freedom of Speech’ in lneke Sluiter and Ralph Rosen (eds), Free Speech in Classical Antiquity (Brill 2004).
5 Elizabeth Power, Freedom ofSpeech: The History ofAn Idea (Bucknell UP 2011).
7 John Milton, Areopagitica: A Speech for the Liberty of Unlicensed Printing, to the Parliament of England (J C
Suffolk ed, University Tutorial P 1968).
8 John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (David Spitz ed, W W Norton 1975).
9 An alternative understanding of Mill sees On Liberty as less about the search for truth and more about the
development of certain virtues of intellectual character. See Vincent Blasi, ’Shouting ”Fire l” in a Theater and
Vilifying Corn Dealers’ (2011) 39 Capital U L Rev 535.
1° See also Frederick Schauer, ’What is Speech? The Question of Coverage’, chapter [9] in this volume.
Electronic copy available at: httpszl/ssrn.com/abstract=3719661